# Map Generation Project
### By Joe Howarth

## Purpose
This project seeks to procedurally create plausible geography 
and display it as a map.
The generator will be used for creating the starting 
conditions in a historical population dynamics simulation.

## How to Run

```bash
npm i
npm run serve
```

## Methodology
Unlike many map and terrain generators, this project does 
not use noise as the fundamental building block.
Instead, it uses a Delaunay triangulation over 
semi-random points, then combines elevations from several
hill, mountain, basin and slope functions. Once the base 
geology is in place, for each triangle it's slope, downhill triangle,
water flux and erosion rate are calculated. Eroding the initial 
terrain leads to natural looking ravines, plains, fingered mountains 
and long river valleys. 

Rivers can easily be found by thresholding water flux. Similarly, coast
outlines and terrain contours can be made by finding edges that straddle
some height value. These three methods share a way to combine neighboring 
segments into 1 longer river, coastlines etc.

Cities and Towns can be placed by A.) valuing high water flux, 
B.) distance away from other settlements and C.) coastal triangles. 
The first several placed are classified cities and  get the best 
locations and have the highest repulsion factors. Then towns follow,
but these aren't as affected by distance, so they can 
"fill in the gaps". 


### Data Structures

##### Array Based DCEL

For performance, using flat arrays and indexes instead of heap 
allocated objects to represent DCEL graph

    halfedges: maps edge index to opposite halfedge index

    triangles: maps edge index to vertex index

    points: maps point index to x,y coords
    
    centroids: maps triangle id to x,y coord of centroid

To gain full power from structure, many transformation functions 
were defined, for example

- edges_of_triangle
- triangle_of_edge
- next_edge
- prev_edge
- edges_around_point    etc.

This structure is ideally suited for static DCEL's, but suffers when 
updates are required. 

After initial DCEL building, many triangles near edges were too 
obtuse and disrupted slope and erosion calculation, so these trinagles
were removes. This posed a problem for the index based DCEL because 
many operations would map over all points, centroids, triangles etc. 
and expect a contiguous array. This was solved by creating a new 
contiguous array 'triIDs' which mapped to the now hole-y base DCEL
generated by the Delaunay triangulation.

On top of this, conventional adjacency lists and centroids allowed
easy mapping over the graph for calculating slopes, 
downhills, erosion, flux, city sites, rivers,  

## Parts to Consider for Computation Geometry Final Project

### Use of DCEL adaptation

see above, WIP

### Planar point location

A key feature of maps is for visually displaying information and
allowing for interaction 

WIP

## Planar Point Data

| Number of Triangles| Distance from last query (km)| Naive (ms)| Vectoring (ms)| Vectoring w/ grid (ms)| 
| ---------  | -------| --------- | ---------- | -------- | 
|  294500  | 19.75    | 63.40 | 0.20  | 0.086 | 
|  294500  | 20.8     | 79.3  | 0.31  | 0.22 | 
|  294500  | 149      | 58.5  | 5.1   | 0.144 | 
|  294500  | 185.3    | 59.3  | 3.33  | 0.13 | 
|  23950   | 6.31 | 6.12 | 0.13   | 0.056 | 
|  23950   | 227.3 | 5.69 | 1.297 | 0.098 | 
|  1994   | 41.1 | 0.45 | 0.19    | 0.032 | 
|  1994   | 93.1 |  0.75 | 0.21  |   0.028| 


Scaling  (relative to 1e3, average ms)

| N | Naive | Vectoring | Vectoring w/ grid |
| ----- | ---- | ---- | --- |
| 1e3 | 1, 0.60 | 1, 0.20 | 1, 0.03| 
| 2e4 | 9.8, 5.9 |  3.5, 0.71 | 2.5, 0.077|
| 3e5 | 108.5, 65.1 | 11.2, 2.24 | 4.83, 0.145


# References 

* Amit Patel http://www-cs-students.stanford.edu/~amitp/game-programming/polygon-map-generation 

* Amit Patel https://mapbox.github.io/delaunator

* Martin O'Leary https://mewo2.com/notes/terrain

* Scott Turner https://heredragonsabound.blogspot.com 

* Mark de Berge et al - Computational Geometry and Applications 

* Diane Souvaine - Comp 163 lecture notes and homework http://www.cs.tufts.edu/comp/163/

* BabylonJS https://www.babylonjs.com
